---
layout: post
comments: true
title: "#10 - Consoles and API client environments"
date: 2019-07-22 03:32:44
image: '/assets/img/day10/blog.png'
audio: ""
description: "Both assist in getting onboard and learning how your API works."
tags:
- DX 
- 100DaysDX
- openapi 
- RAML
- Insomnia
- Postman
categories:
- DX
- 100DaysDX
twitter_text: "Both API Consoles and API Client environment (for example Postman and Insomnia) assist in getting onboard and learning how your API works."
---

## API Consoles

Machine-readable spec files are part of the documentation of any great API as it was written in previous post. **OpeAPI spesication** (formerly known as Swagger) is one of the most commonly used spec format with REST APIs. It is enforced by plethora of API development companies and developed under the wings of Linux Foundation. Tooling around OpenAPI spec has exploded with the popularity. One of the tools in API viewer which renders the spesification file in "human format". If used right, it can act as testing and learning environment both internally and by 3rd party developers. 

....

## API development and testing environments

Postman is one of the most popular tool to dissect RESTful APIs made by others or test ones you have made yourself. Postman and alike tools can be used to get familar with APIs without writing any code. These tools are prettier GUI alternatives for testing APIs with cURL among other things. The point is that the same tool can be utilized by internal developers (building the APIs) and 3rd party developers consuming the APIs. One familar format to enable easy setup for 3rd party developers, is to export collections for the selected tool. 

### Ready - set - Go! 

This is what Postman offers - collection with environment configurations. By importing the ready made collection of API calls the 3rd party can start exploring the API with own tools and own environment (desktop). As for GUI alternative is to offer browser based API console in which 3rd party developer can make requests to the APIs. Yet Postman and alike solutions are more versatile and often easier to use.  

### Which one to choose? 

I asked our developers about why they chose Insomnia over Postman and reason is that again Insomnia fits better in the teams workflow and is considered more agile in development. The overall image of Postman inside the team was not that good:

- “They [Insomnia] tend to address the bugs and feature requests in GitHub pretty fast”.
- “whereas Postman refuses to provide a good fix for a critical issue causing issues to lots of people and has been reported years ago”
- “compared to my last experience with Postman, Insomnia is easier for both new users and experienced users, as well as just having more useful features, and most critically - less bugs." 
- "I initially switched to it simply because the `hosts` bug made Postman unusable”

The above reasons among others has turned our developers to use Insomnia instead of market leader Postman. Given the above situation my options as Developer eXperience lead are:

1. Force the team to use Postman because that is most often expected
2. Create / get a tool to convert Insomnia export to Postman collections
3. Use Insomnia and offer needed configuration for that in public for 3rd party developers. 

Option 1 is out of the question in short term. I will not force developers to use other tools than what they see fit. They have selected the tools for a reason and messing with that would cause more new problems than solve any existing ones. Second option is more likely to exist in some form (did not check yet) as a tool or service, but conversions contain always a risk to break something. Thus I did select to go against the mainstream even if I know that some of the API consumers want to see Postman collections. We will provide Insomnia settings and package to fiddle with our exposed APIs. Of course we provide detailed guide how to work with the Insomnia in minutes and start learning the opportunities and options of our APIs.  

## Conclusion

