---
layout: post
comments: true
title: "#24 - Trial or freemium - which one to choose?"
date: 2019-08-03 03:32:44
image: '/assets/img/day21/blog.png'
description: "You would not buy a car without a test run either."
tags:
- DX 
- 100DaysDX
- freemium
- business
- trial 
- subscription
categories:
- DX
- 100DaysDX
twitter_text: "You would not buy a car without a test run either."
---

## As a Service


## Trial

Because subscriptions are based on the association of a payment method with a plan, your customers must provide a payment method at the start of any subscription – even those that include a trial period before the first billing cycle. The day after the trial period ends, customers will be charged automatically for the subscription. Customers are not alerted by default when they enter the first billing cycle – you must be proactive to make sure your customers know that the trial period is ending and they will be charged soon.

The failure to alert the customer prior to their charge, or give them the option to opt-out, will result in something referred to as negative option billing. Negative option billing puts you at an increased risk of chargebacks, as customers may not be expecting this delayed charge.

Negative option billing is generally prohibited amongst banking partners. We strongly recommend you avoid this practice by notifying customers of the first billing date towards the end of their trial period. 

The auto-renewal without an email asking the customer if they want to renew a particular service might be legally OK, but is it ethically OK? Who can remember renewal dates for all of our subscriptions these days? I think it's disgraceful.

## Freemium 

With freemium you do not get the above mentioned shitty situatons. You just use the API and depending of the service provider you might be cut off from the service for a while (before new period begins) or you might experience slow or otherwise limited service. 