---
layout: post
comments: true
title: "#6 - Show the result I can create with your API as a selling argument"
date: 2019-07-19 03:32:44
image: '/assets/img/day4/blog.png'
audio: "https://s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/100daysdx/c462f6be-41c4-4ee3-ba3d-ceb18b3573d3.mp3"
description: "I'm not going to buy your API product unless I can try it and see the results if they have any value."
tags:
- DX 
- 100DaysDX
- value proposition
- text-to-speech
- amazon
- google
- freemium
categories:
- DX
- 100DaysDX
twitter_text: "I'm not going to buy your API product unless I can try it and see the results if they have any value."
---

This post is a personal experience. As it was mentioned before I'm more like a spaghetti ccode developer than professional developer. Keep this in mind while evaluating the story of text-to-speech service selection. 

I've done a lot of writings in the past. Some people are happy with text format, but some would like to listen to what I have to say. We all know that podcasts have been a big thing lately. Those have been coming from all over - some good some not so good. I also wanted to have text and sound of my 100 Days of DX learning experiment. I was considering to record the texts on my own machine and use those. That sounded like too much work for the effort. This is not my job and I still have 7 kids at home to take care of. I needed something simple. 

## Lets use machine learning in text-to-speech

Then I thought of services (API) which would turn given english text to voice and offer mp3 soound file for it. I did some experimentation with this concept a few years back and I had terrible experiences. So I had my doubts of this, but hey lets give it a try. Lets take this as a learning experiment as well. 

I asked my friends in Twitter for advice. I asked for text-to-speect API recommendations. Google, AWS, Microsoft and some other smaller players were suggested. You know the normal offering. I went to Google service first. After clicking around for a while I found a site where I can try the service with some text. I must have arrived to API console since I was expected to find out how the API works with given documentation. I tried it for a few times and got error pages. Too fucking hard to get first positive experience. 

## Show me first that the result has value for me

I just wanted to hear what the result sounds! As a first step I don't want to fiddle with your API? Since I was skeptical about how natural the voice would sound in the recording I wanted to hear the result first. If the result would be good enough for my purposes, I would select the service and even pay for it. Regardless of the service provider. But for sure I will not select a service based on what kind of parameters are given in API call or how well it is documented. That would be the next step in service evaluation. Advise for service provider is that convince me that the end result has value for me, then I will find out how to use your API and how to add that to my development CI/CD process.  



I have couple of Alexa's at home and I have been happy with  